welcome back to another video in this
video we're going to develop and
implement an options trading algorithm
inside of the quant connect platform
using python if you want to code along
make sure to first create a free
quantconnect account
there's a link in the description box
below otherwise i want to start with a
short disclaimer
namely that the main purpose of this
video is to give you an overview of the
trading algorithm development process
the quant connect platform and its api
therefore i'm not claiming
that the strategy that we're going to
implement is necessarily a very good or
profitable strategy
so please keep this in mind when
watching this video with that being said
let's cut right to the chase and start
developing our trading strategy
before we start actually implementing
anything though let me first present the
strategy on a conceptual level so that
you better understand what our code is
supposed to do
the strategy that we're going to
implement is not a very active strategy
the goal of the strategy is to reduce
volatility and protect against downside
moves in an existing long equity
position
to accomplish this we need an investment
with an inverse correlation to our long
stock position
for this we will be using put options
because of several reasons
first of all they have a negative delta
which means that they profit from
downward moves in the underlying asset
secondly they have a positive vega which
means that they profit from an
increase in implied volatility and this
is good because implied volatility
usually goes up when prices go down in
other words implied volatility
typically has an inverse correlation to
the underlying asset
last but not least put options have
limited risk while leaving a lot of
upside potential
the problem with this strategy so far is
that constantly buying put options as
protection can be very expensive and
negatively impact the overall
performance
that's why we only want to buy put
options if we suspect an upcoming market
decline
we measure this by looking at the
normalized implied volatility of the
past half year
if implied volatility is relatively high
we buy a put option as protection
usually this will mean that the market
has already dropped by a certain amount
but in the long run we hope that buying
protection a little later
will be better than wasting money on
unnecessary protection on a constant
basis
before we head over to the quan connect
platform let me quickly recap the
strategy one more time
the goal of the strategy is to reduce
downside risk and volatility of an
existing long equity position
without wasting too much money on
unnecessary protection
we accomplish this by buying put options
when volatility is relatively high
we use this high level of implied
volatility as a sign for a potential
upcoming market decline
with that being said let's now head over
to the quantconnect platform and start
writing some python code
if you haven't done so already make sure
to quickly create a free account before
continuing to watch this video
if you have done so navigate to the lab
tab and click on create new algorithm
then a collection of template modules
will pop up but we won't be using any of
them in this video
instead we click on create algorithm to
create the new algorithm
for now you should see an on data and
initialize method
we will use both of these methods for
our algorithm but before we start
implementing them let's first
import two things
firstly we will have to import time
delta from date time
and then we will import everything from
the quantconnect.data.custom.cboe module
we will use this custom cboe data to get
pricing data for the volatility index
or vix which measures the implied
volatility of the s p
500 index we will use this data to
create the indicator
that measures how high or low implied
volatility is
compared to recent history but before we
get to the volatility indicator
let's first implement our initialize
method we will first set a start and end
date for our back test
we will choose the 1st of october 2017
as a start date
and the first october 2020 as an end
date but feel free to try out different
periods if you want to
next up we will set a starting cash
balance for the bag test
i will go with 100 000 for now
then we will have to add the underlying
security that we're going to trade
for this video i will choose the etf spy
as an underlying security since it
tracks the s p 500 index and has great
options liquidity
we will add minutely data since as of
right now the quant connect api
only supports minutely data for options
furthermore
only raw pricing data is supported with
options which means that the historical
data does not adjust prices for stock
splits or other similar events
but this shouldn't create any problems
for us
lastly we save the symbol of our
underlying asset into the variable
self.symbol
then we also want to add vic's pricing
data which we can do with the add
data method we save the symbol in
self.wix so that we can later access the
data
then we initialize the volatility
indicator to zero
we will later use this indicator as an
entry signal for our options position
besides that we also have to initialize
a few more variables
first we initialize self.contract to an
empty string
and self.contract added to an empty set
self.contract added will keep track of
which options contracts we have added so
that we don't unnecessarily add
options data multiple times next up
we will initialize most of our
parameters the first parameter is called
self dot
days before x and it represents how many
days before expiration
we will close our options position we
want to close the position before
expiration
so that we don't exercise any of our
options this means that two days before
expiration we will close our long put
position if we have one
i quote the next parameter self.dte and
it represents our target time till
expiration in days
so a value of 25 means that we aim to
buy a put option with about 25 days
until expiration
self.ocm is the target percentage that
our option should be out of the money
so 0.01 means that we want to buy a put
option that is
out of the money by one percent
next up we have self.look back iv
which represents the number of days our
volatility indicator looked into the
past so 150 means that it compares the
current vix level to that over the past
150 days
self.iv level is the level of our
volatility indicator
above which we want to buy put options
as a protection against the potential
market crash
in other words this is the signal line
then we specify what percentage of our
portfolio will go to the underlying
asset
since this strategy is a passive
strategy i will initialize this variable
to 0.9
which means that about 90 percent of our
portfolio will go to spy
last but not least self dot options log
specifies how many options contracts
we buy compared to the number of shares
of the underlying asset that we own
so a value of 90 here means that we buy
one option for every 90 shares that we
own
a standard option contract covers 100
shares of the underlying
so a value of 90 here means that when we
buy put options as protection we buy
more than enough to cover the entire
portfolio
the lower this value is the more
protection we buy
i know the initialize method can be a
little boring but we're almost done with
it so stick with me
we just quickly have to schedule two
methods that we want to be called on a
regular basis
first we schedule our so-called plotting
function which we use to create custom
charts
we want it to be called every market
there that spy trades
or more specifically we want it to be
called 30 minutes after every market
open
we then schedule the vix rank method in
the exact same way
this method will be used to calculate
our volatility indicator value
last but not least we have to set a
warm-up period for our algorithm so that
the volatility indicator
has enough data to be used correctly
right from the get-go
now that we are done implementing the
initialize method let's create and
implement the vxrank method so that we
can use our volatility indicator for
entry signals
to create and update the volatility
indicator we first need to look at the
past
fixed price data we can access wix's
price history by calling the history
method
we then specify the symbol time frame
and resolution of the requested data
for the symbol we use self.wix and for
the time frame
we use the self.lookback variable to get
the price history of the past 150 days
furthermore we request daily data since
we are only interested
in the high price low price and current
price over this time frame
the history method then returns a data
frame with a high
low open closed price and volume for
each day over the specified time
the next step is to actually calculate
the value of our volatility indicator
which we will call self.rank
to calculate this value we have to
normalize the current vix level by
looking at its high
and low price the exact formula that
we're going to use
is the current iv level minus the low
price
divided by the price range
in simple terms the vxrank method
calculates how high or low the current
fix level is
compared to recent price history so a
value of 1
would mean that the current vix price is
at a new high whereas the value of zero
would mean that it is at the new low
and the value of 0.5 means that the
current vix price is right in the middle
now we are finished implementing the vix
rank method which means that we can move
on to the on
data method which is called every time
our algorithm receives new data
this should be pretty much every minute
since we requested minutely spy data in
the initialize method
the first thing we have to do is make
sure that our algorithm is finished
warming up
we can do this with a simple if
statement if it's not finished warming
up we just return and do nothing
next up we check whether we already are
invested in the underlying asset
if we aren't we use self.set holdings to
buy shares until our portfolio's
holdings
in this asset are about the percentage
of self.percentage
the next step is to check whether our
volatility indicator self.rank
is above the entry signal level which we
initialize to 0.5
if it is it means that spy's implied
volatility
is relatively high and we therefore want
to buy put options as protection
we do so by calling the self.buy put
method which is a method that we will
implement in a few minutes
now there only is one thing left to
implement in the on data method
namely checking whether we are too close
to the expiration date
if we are we want to close any existing
put positions
obviously we only want to do this if we
already are invested
that's why we first check whether
self.contract is non-empty
if it isn't empty we should be invested
in a put option
we then check whether the expiration of
this option is within two days of today
if it is we want to close it so that it
doesn't expire and is exercised
to close the option we use
self.liquidate thereafter we log that we
close the option and reset self.contract
to an empty string
now that we're done with the on data
method let's implement the buy put
method which will actually buy the put
options
but before this method can buy any
options it first has to get the data for
these options
so if you currently don't have a
contract to trade we first get it by
calling options filter which is another
method that we have to implement here
after
after saving this contract to
self.contract we return
we do this because adding new options
data usually takes at least one
iteration of your algorithm
if we already have a contract to trade
we aren't already invested in it and its
data is ready
we want to buy this put option
this can be accomplished with self.buy
which takes two
arguments the first is the symbol of the
actual security
and the second one is the quantity since
we want to buy the earlier specified put
option we use self.contract for the
first argument
and for the quantity we divide the
number of shares of the underlying that
we own
by the self.options parameter which we
initialized earlier
but before we can use this value we have
to round it to the nearest integer
this method will now buy one put option
for every 90 shares of the underlying
security that we own
note that the 90 shares is the value of
self.optionsaloc which we initialized in
the beginning
next up let's implement the options
filter method which we use to find out
which option we want to trade and add
the correct data for this option
the quant connect api has multiple ways
to trade options
the easiest way to trade options is by
using set filter
and by iterating over option chain
objects the problem with this
is that it unnecessarily adds huge
amounts of options data which makes the
algorithm very inefficient
in fact it makes it so inefficient that
it can take many hours for you to
backtest your algorithm over any
noteworthy length of time
that's why we won't be doing it this way
instead we will be using the so-called
option chain provider which allows you
to manually add the data for only those
options that you actually want to trade
doing it this way allows you to backtest
strategies that would normally take
hours in a couple of seconds or minutes
but one disadvantage of the option chain
provider is that it currently does not
allow you to use options greeks and
implied volatility values
luckily we don't need them for this
algorithm but for many other options
algorithms we will want to use the
greeks to select option contracts to
trade
so if that's your goal the option chain
provider is currently not the best way
to do so
but that's a topic for another video now
let's implement the options filter
method
we will first add the currently
available options contracts for our
underlying
by using self dot option chain provider
dot get option contract list
we can now manually filter this contract
list by strike price
expiration option type and option style
but before we do that let's quickly save
the current price of the underlying
asset to self.underlying price
we can do this with
self.securities.price
now we first filter out all the out of
the money put options that expire close
to our desired expiration date and save
them into otm
puts to filter output options only
we check that the option right equals
put for each option
to only select sufficiently out of the
money options we make sure that the
underlying price
minus the strike price of each option is
greater than the underlying price
multiplied by the amount we want our
option to be out of the money
this amount self.ota was initialized to
one percent in the initialize method
next up we checked that the number of
days from now until the expiration date
of each option is within plus or minus
eight days of our desired expiration
date
if the otm puts list now isn't empty we
sorted in a way so that the options that
are closest to our desired strike
and desired expiration date come first
thereafter we select the first option of
this sorted list
this is the option that we want to trade
but before we can actually trade it we
must first add its data to the algorithm
we only do this however if we haven't
done so already
if we haven't we use add option contract
to subscribe the data for the specified
contract
then we return this contract so that the
buy put method can buy it
if the ocm puts list is empty we just
return an empty string since there is no
option that meets our criteria
now we are pretty much done with
implementing the functionalities of this
trading algorithm
nevertheless we want to add two more
small things
firstly we implement the plotting method
which will create two charts that can
help us understand our algorithm's
performance
to create a custom plot we use self.plot
which takes three arguments
the first is the name of the chart that
we want to create and the second
is the name of a specific plot on this
chart and the final argument
is the actual data for this plot
we will create two custom charts with
two plots each
the first will plot our iv indicator as
well as the entry signal line
and the second chart will plot the price
of the underlying asset as well as the
strike price of any open put positions
to plot the strike price of an open put
position we must first check whether we
are invested
we do this by creating a list of all
option positions in our portfolio
if this list is not empty we have an
open put position
if that's the case we use self.plot to
plot this option strike price
last but not least we will use one more
method for one more tiny thing the name
of this method is
on order event and like the name implies
it is automatically called on every
order event
all we want to do is use self.log to
lock each order event
this is great for backtesting debugging
and live trading purposes
since it can give you a good overview of
what order events are happening
with that being said we have now
successfully created our options trading
algorithm
all that's left to do for us now is
click the back test button in the top
right
this will then backtest our trading
strategy over the time frame that we
specified in the initialize method
since i specified the time frame to be
the last three years
the results will be those generated from
this data
please keep in mind that depending over
which time frame you choose to backtest
this algorithm
the results might be significantly
different and potentially much worse
than over this time frame
when the backtest is finished a
performance overview and report will be
generated
for you to analyze your strategy and its
performance
i will select the data chart and voile
chart since these are the custom charts
that we created for this algorithm
since we didn't use most of these other
charts i will deselect them
as you hopefully can see over this time
these strategies seem to work pretty
good
we can directly compare our strategy's
performance with that of spy
by looking at the data chart below this
equity chart
as you can see from the data chart spy
also managed to generate a pretty solid
return
however the key difference here is that
spy achieved these returns with a pretty
high degree of volatility
over these three years there were
multiple times where spy
actually was down overall our strategy
on the other hand
was profitable pretty much the entire
time especially the very steep crash of
early 2020 was handled very well
generally speaking the put options
protect us best against short and fast
crashes
it doesn't perform nearly as well during
long-term barrier markets such as the
one in 2007
and 2008. below the data chart we can
see the custom volt chart which displays
our custom vix indicator
as well as the entry signal level
below that chart we can see an overview
of many more metrics that can be helpful
when analyzing and evaluating a trading
strategy and its performance
down here you can also view all the
orders that the algorithm places
access the logs the code and much more
if you want to learn how to best
evaluate a trading strategy with the
help of these metrics
charts and more i highly recommend
checking out my latest video
in which i talk about how to best
evaluate your trading strategies
otherwise if you want to copy the code
from this video and play around with
this algorithm yourself
make sure to check out the link in the
description box below to clone this
algorithm
i highly encourage you to go through
each line of code and try to really
understand what is going on
if you want to you can also try adding
some improvements or just changing a few
things here and there
in my opinion that's one of the best
ways to learn and get familiar with the
new api
i know that the strategy presented in
this video was relatively simple
but the quant connect options api can be
confusing especially for newcomers
that's why i wanted to start with a
relatively simple example
but if you want me to create a similar
video in which i implement a more
complex multi-legged option strategy
or some other trading algorithm
definitely let me know in the comment
section below if you liked this video
you should also check out one of my
other recent videos
in which i implement a stock trading
strategy in quant connect using python
there's a link in the description box
below otherwise
definitely make sure to like this video
subscribe to my channel and turn on the
notification bell for more content like
this
thanks for watching